The Brain, Imagination, and Memories
====================================

Did you know that when you *imagine* doing a movement for example, you activate
the same areas of your brain as if you were actually doing the said movement?

This gives a tremendous power to the brain on your body, I'll try to show you
how far all this extends, it may be a bit lengthy, but bear with me, this is
worth it.

A common example is a tennis player thinking about how he serves before a game,
repeating the movements in his mind to be sure to remember every details. Well,
while he does this, his brain is actually using the same process as if he was
actually serving.

The same goes for senses, if you use your memory to think about a smell you
liked, you can trigger your brain in the same way as if you were actually
smelling it. And as the brain works a lot in association of things, that is where
your brain will also triggers associated memory, that is why a lot of us have
memory of smell, or taste of cookies, or other treats we loved in our childhood
that are associated with given moments of our life, of the presence of someone
familiar, a mother, a grandmother for example.

This is actually used in some cases of `hypnotherapy
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypnotherapy>`_ and in
`Neuro-linguistic programming
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming>`_ (NLP) like the one
called `Anchoring
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methods_of_neuro-linguistic_programming#Techniques>`_.

Anchoring is a very good example, as it makes you associate a state suited to
face a situation, to an action. An example would be best:

Assume you are someone with too much anxiety, you can try to remember a moment
of you life when you were perfectly calm and felt safe, think about this, and
try to feel every feeling associated, the sounds, the taste, the smell, what you
saw at this moment, the touch of the wind, or of a warm good old sweater on your
body. If you do this properly, your brain should feel like it was at this
moment, it will tell your body: *everything is alright*, and you should feel
that way.

But doing the whole process in the case of a panic attack is not possible, that
is why once you get to this state, you will choose a simple given action like
joining your index and thumb for example, doing this in full conscience,
concentrated on your action.

Because of the state you were in, and the act you just did, your brain will
associate the two. For a good *anchoring* it may be required to do this multiple
times. But once this anchor is properly set, you should be able to trigger the
state you were in, simply by doing the associated action.

This power of the brain is pretty amazing and has quite a lot of possible uses,
I actually discovered the basics of this principle in the following video. I
find it pretty interesting although, **Martin L. Rossman** does talk about the
`Triune Brain <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triune_brain>`_ which apparently has
been unanimously rejected by the scientific community (found in the NLP french
wikipedia page). Anyway, even if the principle of the three parts of the brain
explained there are not completely accurate, the principle stays the same, and
does work.

I suggest you have a look at the video, if you have some time in front of you:

.. youtube:: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KYJdekjiAog

In my opinion (I don't claim I'm right about this), relaxation, part of meditation, of hypnotherapy
and NLP, and probably much more, are all taking advantage of this same capacity
of our mind to gets their benefit, and I'm pretty sure there is still a lot more
to learn about the subject.

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: brain, body, human, hypnotherapy, NLP
.. comments::
